# WORDSMASHER

See it in action: https://ultimate-name-lab.herokuapp.com/

It's heroku (free tier), so it might need ~30 seconds to load initially.

## what is this?
It's a highly customizable, open-source fantasy name generator. It's a tool for writers, dungeon-masters, world-builders,
conlangers, or anyone wants to a lot of made-up names with a consistent, distinctive feel to them.

Wordsmasher lets you customize the names that are generated in a number of ways to create something that's uniquely yours:
* you can combine and weight different languages. You want something that's 60% German, 30% English and 10% Bengali? No problem.
* you can define regex-like patterns to generate names that match a specific criteria. e.g. you want names that start with 'El' and end in a vowel? Easy, use the pattern `elXV` 
* you can tweak the parameters of the generator, like the name length and how closely it matches the input data set

## How is it built?
Java 11 | Spring Boot | Javascript | JQuery | CSS | HTML | Bootstrap

disclaimer: I am not a frontender, I suck at UX, and this project is just a hobby. I know the frontend sucks.

### Name Generation
Names are generated using the **Markov Chain** algorithm. This creates a statistical model of a language based
on input data, and uses this to generate new words that fit that model.

This works by creating a table of letter sequences probabilities: for any given letter (or sequence of letters),
how often in the input text was it followed by each other letter? Names are then generated by using a random number 
generator to probabilistically pick the next letter in a name based on the previous letters. For example, if in the input 
data `th` was often followed by `e` and rarely by `y`, the generator
would be more likely to generate the sequence `the` than `thy`

In this application, each markov model is generated on-demand when the API receives a request to generated names, based 
on the exact model parameters that the user has specified. This is inefficient, but allows a high degree of user control.

### Input data
The input data was gathered from behindthename.com's API as a batch job (using the `BehindTheNameCorpusBuilder` class), and sorted 
into separate files according to gender and nationality. Files were manually grouped into a hierichal structure, which 
allows the user to select a generic group (e.g. 'Scandinavian') and use all data included in that folder and its subfolders,
or select very specific groups (e.g. `Swedish (Male)`). Read more about the corpus in [CORPUS.md](documentation/corpus.md)

### API
The API is built with Spring Boot. It has just 2 simple endpoints: `/corpuses` returns a list of all available data corpuses,
and `/names` generates a batch of names based on a `BatchRequest` JSON, which specifies which sources to use, their weights,
the markov model's "chunk size" (how many letters it checks when building the model), the minimum and maximum name length,
and a regex-like pattern that the names must match.


## Building and running

This app requires java 11. It can be built with maven (`mvn spring-boot:run`) or run through an IDE. The frontend is visible
in a browser at localhost:8080


## FAQ
#### Why is the representation of non-European languages so poor?

It's limited by the corpuses that I have available to me. To generate decent words, the app needs a fairly large data set
to work from, and the data source I used did not have great data for a lot of non-European nationalities. In cases where
a data set was not large enough to be usable on its own, I decided to merge it with geographically similar
data sets rather than discard the data entirely. This regrettably results in over-generalization of non-western languages,
such as Najaho, Apache and Sioux all being grouped into 'Native American'.


## Contributing
Contributions are welcome. If you're a dev, get in touch, I'd particularly love to collaborate with a frontend developer
on this. I'm also looking for non-developers who can help me expand and improve the input data I'm using.